
<div class="sidepanel">
              <!-- This is the div where all the popcorn action will hapen -->
              <div id="popcorn-container">
              </div>
            </div>

## Introduction

The Vietnam War was one of the bloodiest and most polarizing conflicts of the 20th century. Vietnam was portrayed by the US as a war against communism (which it was) but as Secretary of Defence Robert McNamara noted in the interview above, it was one of aggression.  They (The United States) could not fathom nor understand why nations may choose to be communist they believed that it must have been nothing but force or duress that put them there. McNamara looked back in retrospect on the war and provided a historiographical reasoning as to why America went to war and if in hindsight this was the right decision (which he felt it was not). Begin playing the audio clip.

## Historiographical Context
Before one can understand why in 1964, the US entered Vietnam, the global landscape prior to this must be examined. Consider a brief skeletal timeline of events in the history of the world beginning at the turn of the 20th century: from 1880-1900 there was the colonial **Scramble for Africa** where western Europe spliced up the continent, from 1914-1919 **World War I** was fought, from October 27th 1929 until the outbreak of  the second great war The **Great Depression** destroyed countries with widespread poverty, late from 1939-1945 **World War II** was fought and the *atomic bomb* was created, from 1950-1953 the **Korea War** was fought, in 1956 there was the **Suez Crisis** and finally from 1953-1956 there was the **Cuban Revolution**. Much of these events are the clashing of different ideologies around the world and devoid of political opinion they are objective tragedies. Each of these events regardless of the side of the conflict one was on had the same premise: It was good v. evil, righteous v. injustice. Particularly, there was a strong use of this narrative after WWII. We see the world today as a lush global landscape, but from 1946-1991 the world could be essentially divided in half; democracy and communism (This is an over simplification of history but to avoid an incredibly long paper we will operate with this two main themes).

The struggle for began immediately following WWII in Vietnam itself and in Berlin. It began in Vietnam not with America but with France. Vietnam or as it was called then French Indochina was a colony of the French prior to WWII which they eventually lost to Japan at the end of the war in 1945 as a communist country ^[Merriman, John. A History of Modern Europe: From the French Revolution to the Present Vol 2 (United States of America:Yale University, 2010)1166]. In 1946, France managed to retake Vietnam by conquering Hanoi ^[Ibid]. Yet just 8 years later Ho Chi Min and his forces would retake half of Vietnam on 1954 leading it to be divided into two states: North and South Vietnam ^[Ibid]. North Vietnam was communist under Ho Chi Min and South Vietnam became a republic and a client state of the United States with various leaders, most notably Win Van Tu. In the end, control for Vietnam once again revolved around democracy and communism at least in the eyes of the west as McNamara noted. While these events transpired in Vietnam, America and Russia were fighting for control of Germany as a whole. Stalin focused on increasing the Soviet sphere of influence while Truman and Eisenhower tried to contain it. The US feared a domino effect would take place where some nations of war-torn Europe would seek Soviet economic assistance. Initiatives such as the ERP and Marshall Plan demonstrated the deep seeded desire of US imperil economic control over the world ^[Paul S. Boyer, Clifford E. Clark Jr., Karen Halttunen, Joseph F. Kent, Neal Salisbury, Harvard Sitkoff, Nancy Woloch, Andrew Rieser, The Enduring Vision: A History of The American People Since 1865, Vol. 2 (Boston: Cengage Learning 2016)].

## How Does This Relate To McNamara?

So, how does any of this relate to what McNamara was saying?  Well as he noted, America was scared by the past, particularly the Second World War and stated that Winston Churchill left a particular large impression when he said to the US that it was their lat response to the war that cost them Europe. So, despite the conflict of Vietnam not being an American issue, America feared the domino effect, they worried that communism was the new Nazi party. If they let it spread, they would regret it later on. McNamara substantiated this claim when he stated, they would never have a late response to conflict ever again which is why they immediately jumped into Vietnam immediately and was pacified. Tensions were not pacified either, particularly under the Kennedy administration. By this time not only did the USSR have weapons of mass destruction, but they had shown considerable motivation to create a standoff between the US and themselves using client states as well. McNamara noted this when he described the Cuban Missile Crisis. In 1962, U-2 spy planes spotted MRBM’s (Medium Range Ballistic Missiles) on the island of Cuba ^[EXCOMM “Off the Record Meeting on Cuba” Recorded by John F. Kennedy. The White House. In John F. Kennedy Presidential and Museum Archives.October 16 1962](http://microsites.jfklibrary.org/cmc/oct16/doc3.html.) Those missiles had strategic value to Russia as they could have hit any major US target before the country would have a chance to respond. President Kennedy established EXCOMM (executive committee) to deal with the threat ^[Ibid]. The alliance of Cuba and Russia greatly scared the American’s.

This fear was used when the USS Maddox reported a false positive of a torpedo attack ^[Dennis Molinaro. HIS343 Lecture. University of Toronto. March 19, 2018] and this garnered huge support for President Johnson when he took America to War. In fact, the US went to war without the approval of congress. What is key to note and this is a rather unique position held by McNamara was that he felt in hindsight the US was wrong for attacking Vietnam. This was something that was never admitted as the US began to pull out of the war zone. So at retrospectively, it seems some Americans know it was wrong now. However, McNamara is apologizing from an epistemically privileged position which is reflected by this papers look at the historiography of why the US went to Vietnam. During the time, history had created such fear and pandemonium that the US could not see any other reason than to fight.
