# Introduction
To Whom it may concern,

I would like to apply to the Hacking History Grant for the *Large Grant*. The grant would be used to greatly improve the digital availability on the *University of Toronto’s Archives and Records Management Services* (UTARMS) holdings. Currently, the University of Toronto cannot store its entire archival collection in one place but rather in multiple sites. This means that in order to use the archives for research it becomes a very difficult process if you are not located to the Greater Toronto Area. While the finding aids for the archives are now available in a completely digital format on their website the same could not be said for the content. Very few holdings, be it personal records of researchers and other individual records that have been entrusted to the university for scholarly purposes (thesis works, dissertations, lectures, research materials etc.) or other records that chronicle the operations of the University of Toronto and its adaptation to the changing times are available digitally. The University has been around since 1827; considerably longer that any feasible method of digital preservations for archives have been. This explains partially why many of the universities holdings are not available online. The other component is the process of digitization which is a specialized skill that must be watched by a professional archivist to ensure that the records retain as much of their original providence as possible.

I am seeking the Large Grant because I am hoping that the extra funds will help kickstart an initiative to preserve the universities records digitally. I am not seeking to preserve the entire archival holdings as this would take an exorbitant amount of money and time and would need to be a multi-year extremely long term plan. Instead, I wish to adhere to the 5 year limit placed on receiving the large grant and taking the most influential work of the university such as the fonds of Dr. Frederick Banting and Dr. Charles Best’s as well as other figures and make them digitally available for research and other edification purposes for University of Toronto students, researchers and the public. This will clearly involve the applications of digital humanities as firstly, the individuals who’s records would be chosen for publication in the first wave would need to be selected by historians and other experts in the fields that the works may pertain to (doctors, lawyers, phycologists, sociologists etc.). Once the works are selected, archivists would take these works and have them digitized primarily through the means of scanning. The scanning for frail faded documents would be handled by a human while other automated scanners could scan the works that are in a better condition. A reasonable preservation copy (600dpi resolution) and access copy (300dpi) would be created of the document. Then, they would be uploaded to a server. The access copy of the work would be linked to its place in the digital finding aid present on the UTARMS website already. The preservation copy would not be for public access given that it is extremely high resolution, more then what is required for research purposes and it would serve as an immortal copy of the work since eventually, all of the paper records at the university will deteriorate and they will be lost to time.

# Methods

The main tools that would be used to digitize the documents would be a scanner. This would include multiple manual ones which would be used by archivists and other employees to scan fragile artifacts that may be too fragile to scan with an automated one that would flip and scan documents automatically. The next major tool would certainly be computers that have photoshop on them as it would allow for the images scanned to be touched up if any defects happen and ensure the best possible amount of detail to go along with the artifact (preserving rips, coffee stains or yellowing of paper to ensure maximum providence and authenticity). The university would also need to upgrade its server capabilities purchasing their own large servers to store the information in a secure location. The distribution for the finished product would be on the UTARMS website at <https://utarms.library.utoronto.ca>. Specifically, under the categories of digitized work already present on the universities website embedded within the finding aid itself when users access the fonds and accessions assigned to them (the documents scanned). UTARMS already has a search engine for their finding aids and it could be further optimized with search filters beyond just the current “digital works” filter present now. Instead it could be expanded to file extensions such as .jpg, .png and .pdf as some examples. This way if you were looking for a thesis you could narrow your search and create an efficient experience for your end user.

The results and befits of this project would have both immediate and long term success upon its completion. The actual project itself would perhaps raise some important noteworthy rediscoveries that could be used as highlight information to grab researchers attention who are looking for a particular topic. Moreover once the project is completed, I propose that UTARMS website is more readily available and perhaps even tied to the U of T One Search <https://onesearch.library.utoronto.ca> database that way student and researchers alike would be able to access it in a seamless manner. In the long term, the more initiatives that are set up like this the majority of the archival content would be rediscovered by the university and those who research it. The project itself will not produce new research as in the information it desalinates but it will most likely re-release information that is not known or perhaps only know by a small subset of experts. However, it may produce learning experiences in the practices of Archival care and preservation that could be recorded and utilized by the Universities Faculty of Information to help better enhance the field. It would also be a great learning experience for other digital humanities students to experience because they could garner first hand accounts of how a large scale digital humanities project is conducted in a practical application. This was something I had the opportunity of understanding with a course on Archival practices at the University of Toronto and is the inspiration for such a project.

# Timeline

This project would seek to take full advantage of the maximum timeline of five years to create the digitized records. The reason for this is twofold. The first reason revolves around the process itself being one that would require a high degree of accuracy. U of T has man old artifacts so for example, if maps of Old Toronto(c. mid 1800’s) were to be scanned, it would have to be scanned by an individual because it would not be able to be scanned by the automated machine as it would damage the paper. So, this would require time to make sure the map or whatever document is produced with a high degree of accuracy. There would be also need to be scans made of both the *recto* (front) and *verso* (back) copy of the work. Even if it was blank, this would ensure the authenticity and reliability of the record so as to show that the archivists were not trying to censor or commit information from a particular artifact. Moreover, regardless if the artifact was scanned by a human or by machine automation, it would still need to be reviewed manually by an archivist in order to ensure that all the information they wanted to gather from the image was present. The second reason it would take five years to complete is this project will become more successful as more documents are added to the archives digital repository.  With more digital content, the accessibility of the archive would become much more open. This would enhance its value as an institution.

In order to achieve the desired results above, the project will be broken down into three major phases. The first of which will involve the curation and scanning of the archival collection, This will ensure that despite a large collection, work can be efficiently concentrated on the scanning of documents to ensure the outmost care and accuracy for the records themselves. Phase two will involve the inspection of the images scanned via photoshop and other media viewing software. This is where file size, image quality and formats will be managed. This phase can be thought of as the preparation phase. Enhancements will be made to each photo, archival descriptions will be produced for both a fond and item level. If any defects are found, this would be the time where rescans would happen as well. Finally, phase three of the project will be severe and web development. This is where the team will focus on securely uploading the files to the servers and creating a working developer environment that would allow for the newly resigning finding aid and search engine functions interested with the online repositories. This would also be the time where other university services could be integrated such as the aforementioned U of T library OneSearch. Each phase can be divided into roughly 1.5 years each coming out to a round total of 5 years total.  
